Pop quiz. What's something that you can
see, you can copy, you can even have,
but you cannot use? The answer is a
state-of-the-art open-source model.
Unless you are rich enough to have the
hardware that would cost at least 400K,
then running a copy of Deep Seek V3 is
just a pipe dream for most of us. So, in
response, researchers make smaller
models or even distill them into smaller
sizes. And in some cases, lowering the
hardware requirement by up to 10 times.
But again, even though it's 10 times
cheaper, it still requires a GPU worth a
whopping 20k to run on. So if you really
want to run an AI model yourself, you're
basically left with one other option,
which is choosing a model that has even
less parameters. Depending on your GPU,
a 7 billion parameters or a 1.5 billion
parameters model might sound great for
you. But that means you have to use an
AI with a very tiny brain, and sometimes
it can feel really frustrating talking
to it. So to reduce the hardware
requirement for larger models,
researchers look towards the inside of
the model, which are the ways that
influences how an input is mapped to an
output. Without going too deep into the
math, an AI model is basically like a
function f where if you pass through an
input X, it'll give you an outcome Y.
And in that function, aka the AI model,
you would usually have a weight that
will convert X into output Y. And this
weight is determined through training.
So when you stack a lot of weights
together and make it learn, it will
somehow start to be able to solve your
homework. In a typical model setup, a
weight is stored using FP16, which is a
number system that uses 16 bits to store
a number. And this weight thingy pretty
much represents what we refer to as a
parameter. So in the simplest case, a 7
billion parameter model means there are
7 billion numbers represented in 16
bits, which would be around 14 GB. So to
make sure that the model generates fast,
we put that 14 GB of weight into the GPU
VRAM to ensure minimum slowdown on the
calculation. But let's say you only have
a GPU with 8 GB of VRAM. You can't fit
everything in it, right? Well,
technically you can actively rotate out
different weights, aka offloading, but
that slows down the whole process
significantly even if you might keep its
performance. So one uncommon solution is
to quantize the models. Instead of using
16 bits to store a weight, we can just
use maybe half of it or even a quarter
of it to store a weight. But that would
mean we are losing a lot of precision
between numbers. Because with FP16, the
smallest increment between numbers is
around 0.001. And in FP8, it's around
0.125. And in in4, it's basically one
because everything is an integer. Not to
mention, the amount of numbers that can
be represented will also shrink
exponentially, too. The weights would
then have to be rounded up or down,
which will impact the prediction
accuracy of the function. And if you
want to learn more about floating points
in relation to LMS, we just publish a
premium blog on my newsletter explaining
it in details on how it works. And in
this premium insights tier, you would
also gain access to all my monthly
research reports on over 50 papers on
top of blogs from guest authors on the
latest topics too. Anyways, to make
quantized models usable, there will be
this calibration data set that will
fine-tune the models again after
quantization. then why go through all
these trouble just to run a larger model
when we can just run a smaller one.
Well, with this method, it does show
that we are able to cut down the memory
usage by at least a half. On top of
that, the performance drop off between
FP16 and FP8 is not off by that much.
So, in most cases, when you want to run
a model, it'll probably be better to run
it at FP8 as it'll be smarter and more
economical. And with this research paper
backing up the fact that using a
quantized model is usually better than
using a smaller model with full
precision. Actually, there are more than
a handful that already proved that. You
can look for even more if you ask my
website findmy papers.ai, which went
more in depth about how it works, what
was being experimented on to prove this,
and what might be the exceptions. But if
you do eventually quantize down to let's
say int 4, isn't the model going to be
extremely lobbomized? Well, what if I
tell you how you quantize them makes a
huge difference? And because of that,
there are even researchers working on
proving LMS could run with just one bit
per weight. in just 2 months ago,
showing the world that it actually
works. But before we dive into it, we
all know how chaotic work life can get.
Slack messages scattered, email thread
buried, and critical context slipping
through the cracks of your work while
you spend more time hunting for answers
than actually working. That's why I'd
like to share with you about Tena, your
new AI work companion that makes your
work life as easy as a simple QA.
Picture this. Instead of piecing
together notes from Slack, Gmail, and
Drive, you open Tena and instantly find
the exact chat, doc, or metric you need.
As simple as that. No more digging
through 10 different apps, opening 20
different tabs, and still being lost.
Every reply you send is powered by up to
the minute context, so your responses
are fast, on brand, and hyper relevant,
too. More specifically, Tenka provides
structured memory and instant search.
This converts scattered chats,
calendars, and docs into a single
searchable team brain. So, you can find
anything with one prompt. And Tenka
doesn't just solve the fragmentation of
information. merges internal
communications with knowledge management
through an agent tech pipeline creating
a unified communication hub like a real
AI employee that could actually ship
deliverables. So every team member would
have a multifunctional teammate boosting
your productivity increasing the
organizational communication into a
seamless process and have it getting
work done for you. It is an easy
plug-and-play integration with knowledge
graph. It can sync with Slack, WhatsApp,
Gmail, Outlook, notion, and sheets in
real time, weaving your tools into one
cohesive memory. This lets you draft
perfectly tailored messages, smart vote
surfaces, group consensus, and
autogenerated task list for you. And the
coolest thing they have is the AI memory
inheritance and transfer. So when your
rules change, Tena hands off the
person's entire knowledge graph to the
next teammate, onboarding them in hours,
not weeks. So if you're ready to power
up your work efficiency, Tenka is
offering 3 months of free premium if you
sign up today. You can also refer a team
and earn 20 bucks each. So go download
Tena now with the link down in
description. And thank you Tena for
sponsoring this video. Anyways, the idea
was first proposed back in October 2023
in a research paper called bitnet
sculling one bit transformers for large
language models. In the paper, they
suggest that what if we have an LM model
with only one bit weights which would
only represent one or negative one. Like
imagine a model that potentially
requires 16 times less storage than a
standard model. And on top of that,
removing the need of matrix
multiplications because simple addition
and subtraction would be enough for only
two numbers. However, not only does this
introduce some extreme mathematical
challenges since you only have two
integers to work with, it is also
impossible to convert all the weights
into one bit, especially when the
weights for the attention mechanism and
the signals that are passed between the
layers aka the activations are extremely
important. And unlike models that are
quantized after undergoing training in
full precision, BitsNet is trained from
the ground up with this one bit setup
which gives a much better stability
because your goal is not to salvage
performances but instead building
representations from the ground up. So
even though realistically only certain
layers like linear projections can
implement one bit weights, they were
still able to substitute components like
bit linear to replace the standard
matrix multiplication which would use
much less compute because again you only
have two numbers. So multiplication is
not really needed. While they did not
explicitly state how much less memory
this 1 bit LM requires, it still uses 30
times less energy compared to a model
with 7 billion parameters in full
precision, which is even better than
just the 16 times we initially expected.
But this pure one bit setup has a major
flaw. Even though it can represent 1 and
negative 1, it is still mathematically
stuck at always providing signals. And
this is not a great thing because
sometimes dead signals are also as
important. So to fix this problem, the
same researchers introduced bitnet B1.58
4 months later. This time in addition to
1 and negative -1, they introduced a new
state which is zero. The power of zero
is that it introduces sparsity where it
essentially allows the model to turn off
the connection between neurons. This not
only improves model performance
significantly, but also keeping the
benefit of not requiring matrix
multiplication. And this time they
actually shared the exact memory saved
when using Bitnet for Llama 1 model at
1.3 billion parameters which is used as
a baseline. Bitnet B 1.58 uses nearly
three times less memory while being 66
times faster. For Llama 1 model at 3
billion parameters, Bitnet B 1.58 uses
3.5 times less memory and is 2.7 times
faster. Even though at 1.3 billion
parameters, Bitnet performs worse than
the full precision llama model. For the
three billion parameters model, it is
still able to match and even beat it
across the board, suggesting a really
promising scaling law where the more
parameters they have, the better bit is.
As for memory savings, it also has a
similar trend. When Bitnet is scaled up
to 70 billion parameters from 1.3
billion, it requires 7.16 times less
memory than Llama 70B from merely three
times when it's 1.3 billion. And the
best part is that a 70 billion parameter
spinet B1.58 is still more efficient in
terms of generation speed, memory usage,
and energy consumption than a 13 billion
parameters full precision LLM. Oh, and
the reason why it's called B1.58
is because instead of the original two
states that can be stored in one bit,
now you technically have three numbers
to store. So the information content per
weight is now around 1.58 bits. While
this research paper is a great success
in proving that bitnet works, especially
in larger parameter counts, it still
doesn't change the fact that bitnet is
only addressing the weight size. The
activations are still being passed
around in 8 bits and the KV cache is
still a bottleneck that stacks up easily
the longer the context window is. So to
juice out some extra efficiency, the
same researchers dive into reducing the
activation from 8bit into 4bit 8 months
later. In this research called BNET
A4.8, 8. It uses 4bit activations for
attention and fe network inputs while
utilizing specification with 8 bits for
intermediate states like the outputs for
attention. The 8 bits have to exist
there or else it would introduce
quantization errors due to their
specific data distributions which
usually include very important outlier
values. And as you can see from their
experiment, the performance of full and
A4.8 eight is actually huge
demonstrating that a bit is extremely
important because as you can see in the
four does not even converge. As for the
context window, KV cache can easily
stack up quadratically the longer the
context is and use up a significant
amount of memory especially if they are
stored in FP16 or even FP8. So Bitnet
A4.8 introduces 3bit KV cache. And if
you look at the benchmark performance,
it has barely any degradation on average
accuracy. Having this 3-bit KV cache
means that compared to 16bit cache, you
basically can have a context window that
is five times larger while using the
same amount of memory. What's even
cooler is that bit A4.8 is also not a
dense model, which means it does not
have 100% of the parameters used in the
computation for every input. This is
thanks to the number zero that Bitnet
B1.58 introduces. So there's now an
optional state of doing nothing. This
then enables the researchers to
incorporate some decent amount of
sparsity by using only 55% of the
parameters for every input. Kind of like
mixture of expert models that have
active parameter counts. A very
promising technique, right? But so far,
even though BNET has been tested up to 7
billion parameters and outperforms the
llama baseline, it was only being
trained with 100 billion tokens. So the
very last hurdle is getting the training
tokens up to the trillion level and
proving bit truly works at scale. By the
way, to show you why Bitnet is actually
amazing, let me put some rough numbers
up to give you some perspective. Since a
two billion parameters binet model uses
around 20 times less energy, I'll assume
that it requires around 20 times less
flops to train compared to a typical 2
billion parameters transformer model.
And by using a formula from a research
paper that find my papers.ai found for
me, the flops required for training a
model can be estimated with this formula
6 * n * d with the number six being an
empirical approximation for the flops
required per parameter. The letter N
being the number of parameters in a
model and D being the total number of
tokens processed during training. So
training a one bit net at 2 billion
parameters with 1 billion tokens plus a
20 times reduction in energy used it
would cost around 6 to the^ of 19 flops
and with an A100 that delivers 1* 10 ^
15 flops per second with a GPU hourly
renting price being $2. That would be
about 33 bucks in total per run. And for
the latest paper published on Bitnet
called B1.5A to B4T, which basically
means they train it on 4 trillion tokens
for a two billion parameters model. This
would have cost them around 1.3K for one
training run. So compared to the models
that don't have the 20 times energy
reduction, it's estimated to cost 26K
per one training run. This budget makes
Bitnet incredibly attractive, especially
with how it only has 0.4 4 GB of memory
footprint while being comparable with
Quinn 2.51.5B
which is five times its size. Not to
mention Quin 2.51.5B is trained with 18
trillion tokens which is 4.5 times more
than Bitnet. They also estimated the
energy used in this table. So it is not
exactly 20 times less energy but instead
around 12.4 times less. However, this is
still pretty nuts. 10 times less energy
cost across the board compared to all
the other models while having the same
performance on top of having 5 to 12
times less memory usage. The scaling law
it demonstrates is extremely promising.
Maybe the era of bitnet is indeed upon
us. The next thing to look forward about
bitnet is its long context performance,
especially a 4.8's 3bit kv cache which
could extend the context window 5 to 12
times while using the same amount of
compute. On top of that, there is still
free performance being left on the table
because there is currently no hardware
optimized for their 1.58bit aka turnary
operation. So with the current hardware
technology, Bitnet is still not running
optimally. And if you want to try it
out, the Bitnet B 1.58B4T
models are now available on hugging
phase. You can download it yourself or
try out their demo online here. There
are also a ton of other research papers
that dives in deeper into solving the
turnary operations for transformers
addressing a lot of interesting
technical challenges which I don't have
a chance to get to in this video. So
instead I'll leave a list of them here
so you can check it out if you're
interested or you can also ask find my
papers.ai for more. And thank you guys
for watching. A big shout out to Andrew
Chelas, Chris Leoo, Degan Gan, News
Research, Kanan, Robert Zaviasa, Lewis,
Muk, Ben Shainer, Marcelo, Ferraria,
Zane, Sheep, Poof, and Enu, DX Research
Group, and many others that support me
through Patreon or YouTube. Follow me on
Twitter if you haven't and I'll see
youall in the next